# Introduction

Hello, world! This is my first blog post. I've created this blog for the primary purpose of discussing the brand new Caesar programming language.

For quite a while now I've been working on designing and developing a new programming language that I have named "Caesar." While the language is 
still in development, I firmly believe it has the potential to be a truly game changing language. Over the following series of blog posts, I hope 
to persuade the reader as well that Caesar is a language worth looking into.

But first, preliminaries. The language is named Caesar for two main reasons:

- it is, in fact, the Emperor or Programming Languages
- it is mandatory to be cute and base your language name off of C (a la C++, C#, Objective-C, D, etc.)

Now that I've gotten that out of the way...

# An overview

"Do we really need a new programming language??" *Yes. We really do.* We need Caesar. And here's why:

- Most low-level systems programming languages are incredibly unsafe. This is not a joke. Memory/type unsafety has **literally killed people**.
  It causes security threats to abound and creates endless development headaches that waste untold amounts of effort, time, and money. We can't
  *ever* get away from systems-level languages, because they underlie everything else. By definition.

- Most high-level applications programming languages *really suck* at using system resources effectively. Commonly used garbage collection
  strategies, for example, are inherently non-optimal at best and super-duper wasteful at worst. Garbage collection is used because it's easy.
  Not because it's good. This goes for any number of other aspects of high-level languages. I can detail more of these things later, but suffice
  it to say, we've got *great* hardware nowadays. There's just no excuse for our software running slowly. It's running slowly because the languages
  developers are using are just poorly designed

- Also, why do we even have this dichotomy? Why can't we have a language that is good for systems-level development AND applications development?
  And while we're at it, let's make it also work really well for quick one-off scripts. And maybe even as a shell language. Let's make it so it's
  fast, elegant, and easy to use. But let's make it easy to do anything a C program can do. And also anything a TypeScript program can do.

Have you guessed yet which language that third bullet point is talking about? YEP, YOU GOT IT! It's Caesar. And it's better than the others.

It's worth pointing out a few key points at this juncture.

- I am not trying to claim that I'm brilliant or something. I've just been thinking about these problems very devotedly for quite a while, and I
  have come up with some damned good ideas. You'll see.

- I didn't come up with any of the features of Caesar in a vacuum. In particular, the meat and potatoes of Caesar was heavily inspired by Rust.
  Even though it's really very, very different from Rust (and better). But I'll get back to that later.

- Many of the features of this language are already working. But some are not; many things are still aspirational. I will try to make it clear
  when I am describing features that currently work vs. features that are eventually going to work.

# Bullet points

Here is Caesar in bullet points:

- very modern and elegant syntax inspired by:
    - Rust (except simpler)
    - Python (yep, it's whitespace aware. But less annoying)
    - TypeScript

Actually, before I go on, notice that dichotomy: Rust vs. TypeScript. A decent way to sum up the goal of Caesar is: make a language that is as
easy as TypeScript and as powerful as Rust. Ok, moving on.

- statically typed. But with really powerful type inference
- great for declarative data structures
- great for systems development
- great for simple, high-level scripts and programs
- very memory safe, even in many situations where if you were using Rust you'd have to use an `unsafe` block
- fully compiled. With zero runtime overhead. You can even opt out of the built-in string type and use C strings
- features a powerful flow analysis system to enforce a wide variety of contracts on the code
- links directly to C libraries and libc if desired

# The bottom line

The bottom line is, we can do better than C. We can do better than JavaScript. We can do better than Rust. I don't see any reason why we don't
have modern languages that are smarter and better.

Before anyone thinks I'm a hater, let me give the devil his due:

- C: I love C. It was my first programming language, and it's simple and powerful. For its time, it was fantastic. But why is it still in use
  today? It should have been improved by now! And it "sort of was," about 5000 different times, except it's *still* so obviously much better
  and easier to use for systems development than *any alternative* that it still proliferates in a form that has hardly changed since the 1980's

- JavaScript: Y'know, it's really gotten better over the years. It has even creeped towards being decent. And the incredible work by Mozilla,
  Google, and others to make it just about as fast as humanly possible is inspirational. But it's still so *terrible* in so many ways. Dynamic
  typing. *Weak* dynamic typing. Mandatory garbage collection. A bizarre type system (WTF are prototypes and where did they come from). A legacy
  terribleness that it is always trying to overcome. Bottom line, why *in hell* are we now using this language for *native apps*? Could it be
  because faster, better alternatives SUCK?? (yes. but there's no excuse for that.)

- Rust: Ah, Rust. You won my heart back in 2014. So before I tell you why it's so terrible, let me tell you why it's so great. Rust is the first
  language, as far as I am aware, to have MEMORY SAFETY and NO GARBAGE COLLECTION simultaneously. More specifically, the programmer is free to
  manually manage memory while still preserving memory safety. Many common languages have memory safety. But the way they achieve it is the
  *cheap easy way*. And when I say cheap, I'm saying it's cheap to develop. Not to run. Automatic memory management is terrible. And even if you
  like it, you have to agree that we *need* a language *without* automatic memory management in order to write the ones *with* automatic
  memory management.

I'm going to jump out of my bullet point now, because that went on long enough.

At any rate, Rust was an unprecedented leap forward in my opinion. No other language (that I have seen) has achieved what Rust achieved. There
are plenty of good things about Rust, but, to reiterate, the most important thing about it is that it *has manual memory management* and *also*
*preserves memory safety*. This means it can be used as a systems-level language and an applications-level language.

Okay, but there's a catch

- It's really, really annoying to use

- It has a steeeeeeep learning curve

- It has an incredibly unintuitive pointer ownership model (Is it even an ownership model when it doesn't actually model any ownership? Maybe
  it would be a good idea to do that!! More on ownership later.)

- Has a really noisy syntax

- Relies on macros way too much (not to be confused with C/C++ macros; they are wayyy better than that. But still...makes you wonder if the
  language is a bit weak when macros are used so much.)

- Compiles really slowly (jury is still out on whether I can improve on this)

- In my opinion, it has been suffering from feature bloat in recent years

- Most importantly, why THE FUCK would you name a brand new language Rust? Sounds like it was dead on arrival.

Bottom line, my heart is with Rust, but my head is telling me we can do better. And after years of considering the problem, I think I have the
foundations of a language that will be irresistable both to Linux kernel C devs and to script kiddies. And that's the goal. Because I am convinced
it's possible to design a language that can serve both of those purposes. In fact, I think I've already mostly designed it.

So, without further ado:

# First sample program

	extern "C" fn printf(fmt: &byte, ...) -> int
	
	fn main()
	    unsafe printf("Hello World!\n")

This isn't a very interesting program, but if nothing else it illustrates that:

- the syntax is pretty elegant and noise-free, and

- interop with C is really straitforward.

I'll provide more details on how all this comes together in later posts.